Okay, what's your name and when were you born, sir?
My name is Martin Wiginton. I was born here in
Austin, Texas, February 4th, 1933, which makes me
52 now. I'll give you a brief rundown on the early
years of my life when I was more in the mainstream of
society. Went through high school, graduated in
1950 from Austin High, which at that point in time
was the only white high school in austin there was
one black high school that austin high was one of
the largest high schools in the country we
graduated 1200 people the year i graduated i think
during that period for nine years of my life the
major thing was i was a jockstrap i played baseball
and basketball and in high school at the
university of texas i played baseball and then
semi-pro baseball played in the army i spent Two
years in the Army in the Panama Canal Zone, 1954 to
1956 approximately, all I did there was play
basketball and baseball. I had a jock-crazy
post-commandant, and he had a bunch of athletes
who were privileged characters. In fact, I had to
blackmail him after nine months. They still
hadn't given me a job. All I did was play sports, and
I finally told him I wasn't going to play for him
anymore if he didn't give me some kind of job
because I didn't come into the military, didn't
let them draft me to play sports. I could have done
that without being in the Army. At any rate, he gave
me a job, and I
spent that time in the Army. While I was down there,
I also played professional Winter League
baseball, which was AA, AAA. some major leaguers
playing in it. He made it possible for me to do that,
which I think is probably illegal to be in the Army
and be playing professional baseball, but we did
it. In undergraduate school in 1950-54 at the
University of Texas, I studied a variety of
things. Philosophy was my major for a while, ended
up to be a minor. resources, which is a certain
category of economics, and it depends on how you
define disciplines, but you study resources. I
ended up getting my major in economics, which at
that time is much different from the economics you
have now, which is more statistical and computer
stuff. Ours was theory and how do you motivate
people or how do you answer some big questions
rather than how do you play with math. Let's
see, the middle 50s, 56 down in Panama, came back,
knew I was going to law school. It was the Korean War
period, 54.
And what I did, I knew I wanted to go to law school, I
knew that the GI Bill rights were gonna run out, and
I knew I was gonna need the GI Bill to go to law
school, so I requested that I be drafted so that I
would earn those educational benefits. And I did
get them. So when I came back out of the Army, I
entered UT Law School.
I had entered UT Law School before I went into the
Army. Then I dropped out of law school, went to the
Army, came back, and then I had the GI Bill. And I was
courting the woman who was to become my wife. She
was a resident of Lubbock, Texas. and going to
Texas Tech. Spent about a year
courting her, going back and forth between there
and here. We got married, I guess, about 57. Of
course, that year of courting didn't do me any good
in the Oscars. I dropped out that year. But after we
got married, and Cheryl, my wife, graduated from
Texas Tech. She was a schoolteacher. We came to
Austin. She taught school while I went to law
school. And at that point in time, I guess I
actually made more money, relatively speaking,
or we did, than ever since. We lived in veterans'
apartments, which cost $25 a month, all bills
paid. And I had the GI Bill, which was about $150,
$200 a month, which You'd have to multiply by four
or five men to get the comparable value. She got
teachers' pay, and I worked full-time. My
brother-in-law and sister had a drive-in
restaurant, and I was a manager, assistant
manager there. I didn't go to class as much. UT Law
School at that time did not require, most of the
professors did not require attendance. One of
them did. You had to be there. And I was good at
taking tests, good at studying, good at reading
and cramming, and I did a lot of that. And graduated
from UT Law School in 1960. All during this period,
I was pretty, what I now think of,
pretty damn naive and apolitical.
While I was in the Army, I had an experience that
that radicalized me to some extent made me madder
than hell, which is generally one of the ways
people become radicalized.
Eisenhower, a guy named Dwight D. Eisenhower was
president. He was coming down to Panama. Big
hoopla deal, you know, and I was on the Caribbean
Command headquarters post, which is the top thing
south of the United States. He would be there, he
and Mamie. And I'll be goddamned if the officer's
club and the women's room, they didn't have, it
wasn't air conditioned. And they were afraid that
Mamie might have to go in there and piss, and they
spent $6,000 to air condition that women's room.
And I didn't like that the least little bit there. I
was not making hardly any money at all, and they
were worried about her bathroom. The other thing
that happened when he came down there that really
packed me, they had honor guards when they brought
in all these heads of state, dictators, and
mostly, I guess, nine, ten-something were
dictators. Some of them might have been
Democratic elected, but I don't think so, because
there weren't many in South and Central America at
that time. And they'd come in, and we had honor
guards, and you had to go out there and stand, and
they'd play the national anthem of the country
involved, and then they'd play ours. And you had to
stand at attention. You know, you're sweating. It
was real bullshit anyway. And the bands were
playing. And those planes would fly in. And
invariably, there would be about three planes.
The first plane would be the dictator and his
official party. And the second plane would be the
mistresses and the party girls. And the third
plane would be the booze and all the gifts and
payola. And then we had to cart that shit. Well, the
way I was raised, it went against my grain for me as a
human being, an individual, to have to carry the
luggage of some fucking dictator. I mean, I don't
dig that shit. You can carry your own, but I didn't
do anything. I carried the luggage and went on
about it. But I know it made a big impression on me,
and I didn't like it. Well, back to the
latter part of the 50s, I had several good friends
in law school that got to know real well. They're
very good lawyers now around the state with big law
firms who were very close. But it was during that
time that I began to, I think it was, it's hard to pin
things down, but I think it was during that time
that I began to get more liberal or progressive in
my views. I knew that all the shit that was coming
down about racism and black people was a cut and
dried issue. I mean, and yet you were hearing a lot
of bullshit about you gotta keep up traditions and
they're better off this way than any other way and
blah blah. And at any rate, I graduated from law
school in 1960s. My friends went other ways, some
of them practicing law in Houston, some in
Amarillo, and some in Dallas. My wife and I had
quite purposely not had any children while we were
in law school. But after we settled down to
practice law in El Campo, a little town down on the
Gulf Coast between Houston and Victoria,
she taught school there and I practiced law. El
Campo's in Horton County. It's an area that's very
rich in resources and agriculture and minerals.
Outside of the urban counties in Texas, it's one
of, I think it is, the richest. It's got about 14 to
16 different national origins of people that live
in Horton County. Every year their county fair
type thing is an all nations festival where the
people dress up. They still do this. They dress up
in their costumes and have the food and the music
and all of that. But I had kinfolks there. That's
where my daddy's family had homesteaded back in
the 1890s. And My kinfolks were rice farmers and
cattle ranchers. They'd been poor as hell during
the Depression, the 1930 period. I think one of
them had everything sold out from Hungary. But the
World War II, they got quite wealthy. They were
good farmers. It was much easier to get credit and
get the equipment to do the rice farming and the
cattle ranching. And those two efforts go
together, I don't know if you're familiar with it
or not, but generally speaking they grow rice on
land one year and then they let it lay out for a year
or two and that year or two it's laying out is when
they graze cattle on it and it helps the cattle and
the cattle fertilize the land and it helps rebuild
the land. It's a pretty good system. At any rate,
they were there and they helped me set up a lawn
practice and we My wife became pregnant, and we had
our first daughter within a year from the time we
moved there. At this point, let me say that I have
three daughters. Cheryl, her name is Cheryl
Lemon. She was from Lubbock. Cheryl and I lived
together for seven and a half years. She had all
three girls by cesarean section, which means they
have to cut the woman open to get the baby out
because of delivery problems. We were together
during the three years of law school, then several
years in El Campo, and then a couple of years after
we moved back to Austin. And then we broke up and
divorced, and she moved back to Lubbock and
remarried. Had twin boys then by cesarean
section. At any rate, I have three daughters.
They're great girls, great women now. All of them,
two of them are graduates of Texas Tech and one of
them's about halfway through studying art. The
middle girl is in the Air Force now as an
intelligence officer out in Denver reading, I
think what she does is read satellite photographs
and interpret them for fighter pilots, but I'm not
sure.
My ex-wife and I get along quite well. In addition
to being naive about politics and social activism
during the 1950s, during the 50s and 60s, it was all
a big learning experience for me about sex and
sexual relations and the way people ought to treat
each other. And certainly I didn't treat my wife
the way I should have. She was a very fine person. We
had a lot of good times. I was very deceitful with
her, and it took me a period of six or eight years
probably to work out a lot of the problems that I
think most men and women have, or at least of that
generation and that time had of being able to
communicate and handle each other's desires and
needs.
You just want to keep going chronologically
through, kind of through my life, or do you want to
get back to questions? That was good. I mean, I
don't care. I'm getting ready to get into the
radical part. Describe the hippie scene in Austin
in the 60s.
Let me first say that I have some problems with the
term hippie. Okay, define the word hippie then. I
mean, whatever. It is.
It was used in a lot of derogatory ways by the media
and by politicians and by public opinion,
so-called public opinion makers, to put down a
variety of things, some of which I thought were, at
that time, pretty apolitical. I now have a broader
view of what's political than I did then, but
that whole so-called hippie scene, I think, had a
profound impact on society. It changed me. I mean,
I never was a hippie. I never considered myself a
hippie.
Because it made, they were more honest. Their idea
was and is that people should be honest with each
other. People should love one another. People
should try to help one another.
And most times in our society, people do not do
those things. They are not honest, and they don't
make conscious efforts to try to help one another
or love one another. And
I guess one of the general definitions would be
that the hippies used a lot of dope. And if you're
going to fool with that kind of term, I guess you
could say that Yeah, hippies did introduce to this
society the idea that different drugs have a lot to
offer people. And in my experience, that proved
correct. I say my experience, I don't mean me
personally, because the only drugs that I've
experienced are marijuana two or three times. But
it has an effect on me that I don't particularly
like. It makes me where I can't talk. And I'm a
verbal person, and if I'm having a lot of thoughts
and a lot of good things to feel and say and not be
able to say them, then I don't like it. Also, back
during the early 50s, as was fairly common then, I
used speed one time when I'd been up for 48 hours or
two or three days studying. And hashish, I
experienced that one time during the 60s, but only
once. And all that is concentrated marijuana. I
mean, it's very heavy. It really cools you out.
What I remember about the marijuana and hashish
experience is it makes you much more sensitive to
color and sound. and your own bodily feelings. But
I didn't like the other effects enough where I
didn't do it. Now, what I did do for 30 years, I drank
hard. I boozed hard from the time I was in my senior
prom in 1950.
for 30 years. Lots of beer, lots of alcohol, vodka,
gin, you name it. I've drunk it in great
quantities. I quit about three and a half or four
years ago and it got to be too much of a burden and too
long of hangovers. So that was my drug, was
alcohol. But to get back to the hippies, I think
they had a profound, I know they had a profound
influence on our whole society. They made working
people, so-called redneck bikers, jocks
all re-examined who they were and how they were
treating people themselves and other people
hippies were really open they were willing to run
tremendous risks as far as physical abuse or
verbal abuse but I mean they ran dangerous risks
just by the way they looked and acted which was much
much different from the norm then And all of this,
at that early stage, I would not have considered
too political. But now I do, because it does affect
how people relate. And I know that it had an effect.
It had a big effect on the army, the men in the army.
And they were very loving, open people, were
willing to be warm and close with them. even
knowing that they had major differences about
what each was doing with their own lives. Army men
were getting ready to go to Vietnam and kill
people, and the hippies were saying, no, don't do
that, that isn't a good thing to do. And yet, there
was enough openness and sincerity where it worked
out.
The hippie scene... We had a lot of, the hippie
scene was, to a large extent, I thought, centered
originally out in California, and we had a lot of
interchange between San Francisco and Austin,
people that lived here and traveled out there and
came back. And then later on, during the 60s, a lot
of people traveling between Austin and New York
City, Madison, Wisconsin, Michigan, the more
hotbed centers of student activism. But see, to
me, that gets away from hippies. Hippies, in a way,
they would show up for a major demonstration or a
major political action, but they were not the ones
who day in and day out worked on trying to get
together educational materials, did research,
call meetings, did the planning for
demonstration. All of the things that go into
political activism, most hippies were not
heavily involved in. But they would participate
whenever something made sense to them, and
participate in good ways. So they were a big
political force, but I always wished they had been
more more concerted and more intensive in what
they were doing. But so be it.
Does that hand come close to talking about what you
needed on that? Okay. Was there a difference
between anti-war people and hippies? That's
something that I just said. I like
it. I'd say 98% of the hippies were anti-war
people. There might have been 2% that were so
spaced out that they wouldn't vocalize or state a
position on it, but war and that whole notion is
directly contrary to what I understand to be a
hippie set of principles. The anti-war people are
the ones that I think of as more organized, more
concerted and intensive in their efforts the
anti-war movement was made up of
a number of different elements.
I'll kind of give you a rundown on what my analysis
is and how it was made up, how it was grouped. Of
course, when you're talking about the left in the
United States, you're not talking about a highly
organized discipline structured thing. It
didn't happen that way. There were some groups
that were highly organized and disciplined that
then worked together in the larger meetings to try
to influence the politics of it. There were a lot of
sectarian groups, what I call sectarian people,
who had a rigid set of beliefs. A lot of them were
Marxist-Leninists. who some of the groups,
progressive labor, the Trotskyists, if you want
to be nasty, you call them Trotskyites, but
Trotskyists is a fraternal way to talk about it on
the left. The Communist Party, the CP, which is
about as liberal as the Democratic Party. I mean,
it's really the Communist Party of the United
States is a very milquetoast, lukewarm group. as
far as, I mean they believe in electoral politics
and lots of
dialogue and debate and they're very careful
about being law abiding. But you had the sectarian
groups, another significant element in the
anti-war movement was there were the church
groups, the Quakers, the pacifists.
Then you had the hippies and the students that, as I
indicated a minute ago, would show up, would
participate
in major events or certain things. The main thrust
of the anti-war movement, where all the heavy duty
stuff came from, where the student activists, the
new left people, the SDS, The national groups in
the anti-war movement were called the
mobilization mob, it was called. And whenever a
particular event would come up, there'd almost
always be a different grouping of national
organizations that would come together and form
an ad hoc, one-time
structure to handle it. But where the guts of those
things came from, the big ones, the highly
successful ones, were the New Left SDS people.
Those were the ones that I really identified with.
And I guess, I think now, the only organization
that I remember or that I'm proud of being a part of
was SDS. Even though I was a different age level,
they had a broad definition of what a student was.
As do I, I'm a student of life and we're all students
and teachers and anybody that gets into narrow
categories on those subjects is making a mistake.
At any rate, SDS and the New Left people gave the big
thrust to it.
There were some some few dave delger in particular
comes to mind is is one who for years had been active
in a very organized disciplined way although he
wasn't in any sectarian group i think he's
probably a a non-violent i know he's a non-violent
pacifist approach now that does not mean that i
mean passive towards human life. I mean, he
doesn't believe in taking human life. That does
not mean he wouldn't destroy our property or
something of that sort. There's all kinds of
distinctions that come up. But Dellinger was one
of the few big national leaders who had several
decades of experience before the 60s. I think he
spent the early part of most of World War II in jail
because he wasn't willing to go military. because
of his social convictions, political
convictions. Okay, the anti-war movement, it
shifted forms from time to time depending on what
the event was, whether it was national, regional,
local.
There were major fights to control the politics of
those events. I don't think the Communist Party
ever wielded much influence. The Trotskyists
caused quite a bit of conflict I think up east where
they have a number of old left traditions going
back 50, 60, 70 years. People who came over from
Europe who were socialists or revolutionaries
and a lot of them were Trotskyists or became
Trotskyists after the mess in Russia occurred
when Stalin brutalized and murdered A lot of
people in the 1930s, a lot of people left the
so-called Communist Party and became
Trotskyists or various things.
But I know we had some problems here in Austin with
the Trotskyist groups, but they never were in tune
enough with
the major number of people around to have a whole
lot of influence. They were always very
law-abiding. They always wanted to have
highly... disciplined approach to a
demonstration. I mean, they didn't want any
spontaneity or anybody
doing something that hadn't been discussed and
agreed upon by then, which didn't work in Austin.
They'd say, fuck you, we're going to go. You do what
you want to do, and we'll do what we're going to do,
and we'll meet you down there if you want to come.
But they're very... If you know your politics very
well, you know that the old left sectarians are
very much like the so-called moral majority
people. They're very puritanical and believe
their way is right and you've got to live a rigid...
No dope, no smoking, no fucking... They've got
screwed up notions about everything that's fun in
life. If you like alcohol and sex and music and
dancing and things like that, then the old left and
the moral majority have a lot in common. They're
all backed up.
Now, that's kind of a general overview about the
anti-war movement. Are there more specifics?
That was
good. I mean, we got an overview there of Austin at
the time. Okay, now I'll very broad define the
movement. I've
been trying to think all week, trying to remember a
lot of this to make it easier to talk about. In the
first place, the movement was made up of a number of
different groups, individuals, and ideas.
So I can only tell you what I think of as a movement
and what I think was kind of a general thing as far as
highly political people, which I consider myself
to be, how they viewed it. In the early 60s, the
movement was the Civil Rights Movement,
primarily concerned with racism and civil
rights, and I participated in that heavily.
A little later, It became involved in the
Southeast Asian war situation. Another aspect of
it was student rights, student rebellion against
authority structures and a lot of the ways that
universities and their life was structured.
There's a very good paper called Student as
Nigger. I don't know whether you've ever read it or
not, but it lays out what at that time was thought of
as a pretty good view about how certain people are
channeled and they try to make people fit into
molds. Another part of the movement in Texas, not
true in all states, but certainly true in Texas,
was
the farm workers, La Raza. During the early and
middle 60s there were a number of fairly major
demonstrations which finally years and years
later enough pressure was exerted where they
attained some legislation that was beneficial.
But part of the movement was Chicano rights or
Chicano issue oriented.
In the latter 60s and early 70s, there was a growth
or more focus and conscious effort as far as the
relationship between sexes, women, the women's
movement, which was part of what I think of as the
movement.
By my view, you could not be a member of you weren't
an authentic member of the movement unless you had
certain good views about all of these issues in
other words but we were all realists too i mean we
knew that some people or anymore who were very
macho and racist
so you tried to have an impact on all of that at the
same time you're working on whatever the event was
at the time And there were some major arguments and
major fights. And that was one of the beautiful
things about all of those days was those meetings
and the interchange between people about how they
looked at life, how they treated each other,
whether they were racist, whether they were
sexist, whether they were fair to each other. And
it caused a lot of changes. I think the women's
movement at least has had some margin of success at
changing some of the Chicano macho
culture. I mean, I think it's had an impact on it.
I'm not saying it radically changed, but it's
obvious it hadn't. Well, it's substantially
changed from what it was 20 years ago, believe me.
In
the early, there was a progression that went on. In
the early 60s, all these various issues were
addressed by various groups and individuals.
Major efforts were made. You guys doing okay? I'd
like some coffee. Okay. And results were not
obtained, and there was a radicalization process
that went on. I mean, you keep appealing to reason.
I mean, you keep saying, Mr. Congressman, Mr.
Senator, Mr. President, Mr. Governor, you know,
blah, blah, blah, blah, blah. For ABC reasons, you
ought to do this, and all they do is give you
bullshit and weasel around and continue to do what
is obviously the thing they shouldn't do, you
finally understand that there's shit in this
house. Something stinks. It ain't working. Don't
tell me that it does. Let me say at this point that I
work professionally in liberal Democratic Party
politics. In the early 1960s, I was part of a
statewide organization called the Texas
Democratic Coalition. I was a statewide field
director of that group, and we had 23 projects
around the state in all the major cities which had
significant minority representation, blacks
and Chicanos. And we had an organization that got,
at that point in time, it was considered major
amounts of money from an outfit called the Voter
Education Project out of Atlanta, Georgia, which
in turn got its money originally from The up east
old liberal families like the Stern Foundation,
the Kennedys, Marshall.
There are two or three of the old big rich families
up east that are liberal oriented. They pipelined
money down to the voter education project, which
then put it out to various places, like the Texas
Democratic Coalition, which then did a lot of
voter registration and get out the vote work. And I
was involved full-time, paid professional with
that effort. And at that point, we had the most
volunteer workers. I don't know whether they've
passed it now. I guess they have. But I know doing
that in one year, we had something like 14,000
volunteers and block workers in major cities. And
we increased the black voter registration in the
Chicanos dramatically during that period. I also
worked for a guy for a year and a half who ran for
governor, a man named Don Yarborough, who almost
beat John Connolly in 1960.
Yeah, 1960.
I
think Connolly won that thing by less than a
percentage point. Then I worked for the
Democratic Coalition. I eventually became the
state executive secretary of that, which was the
top position. Larry Goodwin, the guy I was talking
about a minute ago, at that point, he's the one who
got me into that Democratic Coalition to start
with. He had a profound impact on my life. He was a
speechwriter and a very intelligent person. And
he was the first executive secretary of the
Democratic Coalition. He worked in the campaigns
of Ralph Yarber, the senator at that time, Don
Yarber. I did all those things and worked with
Larry, too. learned a lot from him in later years
and he went back to the University of Texas, got his
PhD in history and now is a tenured professor of
history over at Duke and writes books published by
the Oxford University Press about populism and
radicalism in the South and he's the one who's the
oral history, has a big interest in oral history.
Okay, so I went through that, I'm a pro, or I was, 20
years ago at Democratic Party politics, we had a
lot of major convention fights. John Kennedy,
Jack Kennedy, of course, they got money to us. They
did not like Lyndon Johnson and his brand of
politics, but they were in bed with him. It had to be
if they figured to win. But at the same time, they
were feeding us money, hoping that that situation
would change.
the year that, of course, Lyndon Johnson hated our
guts and we hated his.
But when Jack Kennedy got killed and Lyndon became
president, then that became too much for the
organized Texas liberal Democrats at that point
in time. Lyndon as president just exerted too much
power. As vice president, with his connections
with major oil and major industries and finance
people. He had lots of power, but nothing like what
you have whenever you're the top electoral
official.
And he cut off that money from the East. It came down
to the Voter Education Project. Of course, a lot of
the money came from the Voter Education Project. A
lot of it came from the AFL-CIO unions. And, of
course,
I'll never forget the way he fucked over the United
Auto Workers and the steel workers and made them
cave in on a lot of the Democratic Party convention
fights. He didn't have to come down here to Texas.
Neither did Walter Ruther, who was in the head of
the UAW. I mean, they'd sit up there and cut their
deals, make a deal. I think the guy's name was
McDonald, who was head of the steel workers then.
He was an asshole. They'd cut a deal with Linden,
and then they'd pick up the phone and call their top
guy in Texas, and those were two of the biggest
unions in Texas, tremendous power inside the
Lakeland. And they'd say, bullshit, don't do that
liberal thing. You do what Linden wants you to do.
We're going to have something just happen on our
contract. There's going to be so many millions
spent on that aircraft plant. But don't fuck
around. I'm a pro. I mean, I know how that shit
works, which makes me fully realize that
democracy does not exist. It is something that I
want to see exist, and it's, I think, an attainable
goal, but people in the United States should not
fool themselves into thinking that they have a
democracy, because they do not. It's highly
rigged. It depends upon the media and who's got the
money and who controls the educational system.
And a lot of, I mean, you have to take a pretty
examined study of it to understand how people are
channeled and manipulated. There's not any tight
conspiracy by capitalists. I don't believe that
shit. But it is obvious that they've got a
community of interest and they damn sure do their
homework. And ABC, NBC, CBS are all controlled by
the same kind of people. They're all people who
have the vested interest, the status quo at heart.
And they don't want to see changes. Same way with
all the major corporations owned by, or
controlled, owned and controlled by the same kind
of folks. And they take care of their homework as
far as the legislatures and the congresses and the
school boards and the city councils. There's
occasional slip-ups, but they have enough
safeguards where nothing ever runs wild.
You might get a city who think they're going to do
some zoning out somewhere outside their city
limits to protect their aquifer. But then they'll
soon find out from their lawyers and all that that
belongs to the county government. And then you'll
find out that the state never has given the county
governments the right to zone. So that means that
the developers get to do whatever the fuck they
want to out there. So it's a pretty sophisticated
system that exists, but it looks after the major
interests of property owners and
profit-motivated So democracy doesn't exist.
You can go through the academic bullshit, which a
lot of teachers and professors like to do, but I
don't think it's worthwhile where you can say,
well, it's better here than it's better there.
To me, we've got lousy situations in most of the
world. And the question is, what can we do about it?
And the major thing is we gotta speak the truth. I
mean, you can't lie, you can't bullshit each
other. So that's why I always try to make the point
that we do not have a democratic system. It is
highly controlled. You do not get on the media to
express opinions that are contrary to the major
thing. By the way, on this very subject, I did run
for governor in 1968. Yeah, that's when Lyndon,
I was working with the, you know, I've been doing a
lot of different things all during that period of
time, and I was working with a lot of the SDS New Left
people out at the University of Texas, and
Lyndon was president, Vietnam War, the Civil
Rights Movement, all of those things were getting
a lot of attention. That election was coming up,
and And I'm adding it's still true today. The way
the law read then, the television networks do not
have to save you time if you want to go on television
with spots about the war and racism and poverty.
They do not have to let you own that tube. Don't ever
be naive enough to think that if you get the money
together that you can buy spots. You can if they
want you to. But the exception to that, according
to their theory and their law, is that if you're a
candidate, an officially declared candidate,
then they have to sell you the time on the same basis
they do the others. So all of us knew that. We wanted
to mount a television campaign on those three
issues, war and racism and poverty. And the only
way we could be assured that even if we got those
beautiful spots together, 20 and 30 second spots,
and got the money together to buy the town, that we
could get them on was to have a declared candidate.
So I ran for governor. And we got another man
who ran for lieutenant governor that he's since
got fired, or got fired, or got moved out. He used to
be a professor of history down at, or government, I
guess it was, down at Southwest Texas State in San
Marcos. named Bill Malone. He wrote the
authoritative book on country music called
Country Music USA. He's a musician and
musicologist as well as a history of government
man. Very fine fellow. I think he's down at LSU or
Tulane. Hey, Fletcher. It has nothing to do with
what exists in Russia or the Communist Party. I
mean, it's my own definition of what... a good life
in society is about, and a whole lot of that is
communal and people sharing property and
resources and not being able to control it
privately. At any rate, I ran for governor, and
Bill Malone ran for lieutenant governor, and the
purpose was so that networks over Texas would have
to sell us that town. So then I went up east to New
York City,
to try to raise the money and get the expertise
together to get those spots made and to get them on
the air. And I had a pretty good amount of success
because by then the liberal establishment, the
big PR firms on Madison Avenue, the biggest one,
Thompson's something or another, something or
another, was one of the ones I went to. They were
opposed to the war. The majority of the top people
in that outfit were. And
I met a lot of filmmakers who were making all kinds
of films all across the country about the war,
about racism, a lot of that. We finally had it
worked out where they were gonna make those spots.
At that point, I think it cost, I think it cost
$60,000 to make a 20-second spot. Of course, now,
that same spot, It would cost 400, 500, you know,
400. But these people were going to do it. I mean,
they were going to donate their time, their
facilities. They were going to make those spots
for us. Well, we were going to maintain control. I
mean, no way. I'd already been educated enough
where I knew that you've got to maintain editorial
control or you're fucked. So our agreement here
locally was the SDS, New Left people were going to
put together a group which would have the final say
on the content of those spots. So all of that was
agreed upon, and we even got our scheme together
about how we were going to raise money. I don't want
to go into all of that, but in effect what happened
was that Lyndon got out of the race. That's when
there was a whole lot of pressure on him. He already
knew that he was damn near whipped, and there was a
guy running against the incumbent congressman
here who was running on an anti-Lyndon. This was
Lyndon's old congressional seat, and it was a
Lyndon come home. This guy used to be a London
supporter, but he was saying, Mr. President, you
done fucked up, come on, we love you, but you belong
down here, you don't belong up there. At any rate,
all of that heavy pressure was coming down all
across the society. They were having major
problems with the anti-war movement, the student
movement, the civil rights movement.